##Re Me

I am a post-doctoral researcher, dabbling in several fields (social science modeling, infectious disease ecology, and software engineering).  These projects are far afield from my doctoral work (physics, specifically [theoretical statistical mechanics](http://goo.gl/AYgXwH "Woohoo, still no citations!")), but I'm getting great mileage out of the physics toolbox (and the engineering one from work before graduate school).  I've done several talks and posters with various collaborators, and am now turning those into publications, most of which will include a software component for other researchers to use.

I am also a Navy Reservist working for the Office of Naval Research, tasked as the software architect (and developer, and tester, etc) for our [program management software](https://edison.nrl.navy.mil "The source for this is unfortunately not public, or I would link to it as well."), the coordinator and head instructor for a [software engineering course in Ghana](http://pearsonca.github.io/stdio-ghana "The source for this is also publicly available."), and the Executive Officer for the crew that supports the Naval Research Lab's [fire-fighting test platform](http://www.nrl.navy.mil/field-sites/ex-uss-shadwell/).

Prior to getting my doctorate, I worked at [Naval Reactors Headquarters](http://nnsa.energy.gov/aboutus/ourprograms/powernavy2/aboutnr), mostly in the Reactor Components Division, New Reactor Design Group.  That job involved all engineering phases (design, development, manufacturing, operation, and retirement), and I wrote many peer-reviewed technical publications.  However, because of the nature of the work, that's about what I can discuss, and none of those publications are publically available.  During that time, I completed a distance learning Master's program run by the Naval Post Graduate School ([MSES](http://goo.gl/jGI6Tl "Weird credential related to a large portion of the curriculum being classified, and the rest being remote.") in Mechanical Engineering).

I also had a very formative practical engineering experience as the technical supervisor for a [student-run theater company](http://www.hoofnhorn.org/index.html "The new website is waaaay better than what we had, but all the shows I did seem to have fallen into the wayback machine.") and the technical director for several shows.  Lots of experience in drafting, statics, safety compliance, and budgetting.  Plenty of hands-on work, too (carpentry, welding, wiring, et cetera).

##Olin + Me = ?

When I first read about Olin (my senior year in undergraduate), I distinctly remember thinking "well, I just wasted the past three years at the [wrong school](http://www.duke.edu "I do still appreciate jokes about Harvard, the Duke of the North.")."  Each subsequent time I've seen Olin in the news, my updated experience just reinforces that thought: university should be a place to get theory as a backdrop to better application, not theory as an ends in itself.  I got plenty of expertly coached, applied practice during my actual undergraduate years, but that was almost entirely outside the expected classroom experience.  Making that happen was its own valuable lesson, but since most of, say, differential geometry, has been overwritten, I suspect a lot of that time could have been better spent.

I'd love to come to Olin as a student *still*, but your faculty jobs to have as much opportunity for growth, so I'm sure I'd have no trouble getting paid to be there instead.  My traditional engineering technical skills (e.g., what's the necessary thread spacing for this fastener? is the flow coming off this nozzle turbulent or laminar?) are probably a bit rusty to be coaching students on those topics any time soon.  However, I have been working pretty much continuously on integrating engineering and scientific concerns across disciplines for the past decade.

Recently in that vein, I've gotten quite sharp at making detailed, applied ecological models.  From that, I've realized there's an unfilled need for the engineering knack in that area, even if the solutions aren't exactly things we would build.  The challenge is basically how to use Nature's machinery (while avoiding the pointier bits of it), and that demands a remarkably delicate touch.  How can people produce food without destroying other environmental services (or introducing conditions that create, e.g., mosquito breeding paradises), in a way that is robust to new agricultural diseases, that provides ideal nutriution, that people will actually want to *buy*, and that cannot be subverted by entrenched interests?  How can people eliminate disease in way that uses local self-organization to combine prophalaxsis, treatment, environment and industrial changes, without bankrupting the beneficiaries?

So, I see myself at Olin as working with students to invent new ways to live in the *very* complicated ecological machinery.  Not quite the same as designing new devices, but certainly complementary and as valuable.

##Education, Training, and Building a Team with Both

I think the current university paradigm misses out (generally, not just in engineering and science education) on getting work done.  Certainly, there are problem sets aplenty, and the theory of how to get work done or what work is are covered just fine.  But getting something done means knowing just how many threads that fastener does need.  And what material to make it from, and how to install it, and who is going to be installing it, and -- this being a surprise to many people -- actually turning the wrench.  The technical training programs I'm familiar with have the opposite problem; they've got too narrow a focus on work, to the extent that the laser focus on, say, hammers makes people forget that there are also screw drivers (and welded joints, etc).  This is a symptom of limited perspective on how a particular task fits into the whole product.

Of course, the notion that any one person could master all those things is just silly.  That means what we need are teams, comprising members that have a better balance of education and training.

To be an effective team member, you have to know enough about what other people are doing to genuinely appreciate their work, and to be able to be heathily skeptical, to demand better.   I'd call that quality Education -- it's not being the best candidate to do something, but it's knowing enough to be able to work with someone that is.  I do think people have to get their hands dirty to get actual insight, however, and it's not my experience that traditional universities do very well on that count -- too much focus on something that's easy to grade, not enough on a product worth grading.

Effective team members are also *really* good at their part of the solution.  That's Training -- really digging into the details and surviving the mess that inevitably results.  Certainly, the big picture is important to frame that work, but often times getting results is about throwing out the general rules that aren't good enough for this particular context.  I've seen maybe a half dozen classes with that kind of focus.  On the flipside, the Navy did great training on details, but often completely divorced them from the big picture.

Even if the traditional paths were good for education or training, what I think people really need is both, at the same time, and as a part of a team.  The team perspective is just as critical as the other pieces, but I didn't hear a whisper of that in an undergraduate classroom.  There's plenty of it in the Navy, but it's almost all on-the-job rather than getting-ready-for-the-job.

That's what I want to see in a university: faculty catalyzing students to accomplish something together, by having different pieces of a shared puzzle, and by being able to work together to make that happen without needing some "boss" to steer.  I'm not sure how that happens from day zero, but I have some ideas about team-taught, project-oriented courses.   Students would learn about a big picture challenge, and work as teams to address it.  However, different team members would get different focused training on their piece, all as part of one course.  This is the approach we're exploring in the program I run in Ghana.

##Questions

My main questions are
 - I know my cv looks light from a traditional university perspective.  Olin is not a traditional university, however, and I think the other experiences I would bring are valuable to the environment you are creating.  Still, I could be misreading; so: is it worth our mutual time investment for me to put together a more formal package and for you to review it?
 - The kind of work I want to engage in (and am currently looking for funding in) is not Mech, Comp, or Elec engineering.  It's closest perhaps to civil or environmental engineering, but for non-traditional products (something like the [OneHealth](http://www.cdc.gov/onehealth/) perspective).  Will it blend with work other people at Olin are doing?  Is it something your students would engage with?

##Look Forward to Hearing From You - [CABP](mailto:cap10@ufl.edu)
