---
title: Student Development
layout: page
prompt: "One way we measure faculty success is by how our activities and accomplishments
contribute to student development. This doesn’t just happen in the classroom,
and it’s often not a one-person show. How might we approach designing
experiences to help students grow?"
---
Having made it through a few degree programs, I am familiar with several approaches
to classroom-based learning, and as Naval officer for over a decade now,
I've enjoyed several of the military's training programs.  I also take regular
advantage of online coursework and skills workshops.

When these courses have been devoted to someone reciting while I took notes,
that time felt wasted.  Fortunately, a fair portion was not devoted to lecture:
instead, there was something to be *done*.  In the most effective cases, there
were also good coaches encouraging me to think about what went well or poorly,
and of course pose the next challenge before I knew I was ready.  I expect some
of that lecture time wasn't mis-spent, but I never had any concept click except
by stumbling around some project or by arguing about it.

So I approach teaching in the way that I believe I actually learned, minus the
stage dressing.  Several friends also use this approach, and some are education
researchers focused on "active learning", so I think my preferences may also
represent more general trends.

In the cover letter, I asserted that the undergraduate setting needs to focus on
creating rather than transmitting knowledge.  I've been using this approach for
a few years, both informally (and infuriatingly, they happily tell me) working
with people at University of Florida and formally as organizer and lead
instructor of software engineering workshops in Ghana.   Beyond my own
direct experience as a student and instructor, I hold this position for several reasons:

 - another organization will do plain transmission better, and that
 group will have the reach of the internet
 - classes that are only about "the material" or "learning objectives", rather
 than addressing some tangible result, are less engaging
 - encouraging novices to rediscover ideas instead of memorizing means more opportunities
 to find better versions of these ideas

Different students will have different needs when it comes to absorbing some
fact or procedure.  No single instructor (or finite practical number of
instructors) can optimally satisfy each of those in the time afforded for a
particular course.  Among all the voices available via the Internet, however,
there is quite likely a better fit.  Rather than trying to beat the combined
forces of Khan Academy, Coursera, assorted programming tutorials, and of course
the multitude of books in any library, *etc*, we should focus on helping novices
make these resources work for them: common places to get started, the need to
verify information, why we provide attribution, and so on.  This approach has
been very effective with the workshops I've run in Ghana, even given the
frustratingly slow network and that this is typically the first time these students
are expected to find information on their own.  I tell them the first day that
whenever they ask a question, they should expect me to respond with "Where else
have you looked for an answer?" (and that's after I ask them to show me what
they've already tried leading up to this question).  They adapt very quickly.

On the next point, when it comes to detailed "learning objectives", no one is
better (worse) than the military.  Too often, these objectives are bandied about
without ever attempting to convince people why the material matters - which is
also basically what happens in many undergraduate degrees with highly structured
requirements.  This is the game-ification of learning, and is thus subject to
being treated as a game - but the *win* criterion is completion, not
mastery. Walking through the checklist also wears down the experts; they're
frequently the sort of people that are looking for the next new thing, and
asking those people to rehash material over and over isn't going to excite
*them*. Effectively guiding students has a strong performance art component, and
they can tell when we're phoning it in.  I definitely agree with getting people
on board with how they're about to spend their time.  Whether working with
sailors or students, I always start with an objective everyone understands and
then within that framing, discuss how to achieve it.  This framing, however,
never takes the form of a syllabus, though I typically prepare an outline of
what I think needs to be hit upon during the discussion.  In the Ghana
workshops, I start the discussion of loop expressions with "We want as much code
as necessary, but not more" and then we talk about the various syntax choices,
and usually veer into recursion.  Later, I start the discussion on the software
engineering goal of controlling code errors with a similar point, making sure
the students relate it back to the loop discussion, but we also end up venturing
into territory like indentation decisions (which also circles back to the loop
constructs).

Both of these approaches to conveying past knowledge are tied to my position
that creating knowledge comes first.  I start from an approach where novices
could potentially create something new, and then figure out how acquiring
existing knowledge can happen in service to or as a consequence of that goal.
I've basically concluded that instructors can do both by posing good challenges,
keeping positive pressure on students as they engage with those challenges, and
offering a helping hand when they fall (but not before, and not until they can
say that they have tripped). As they engage with real problems, we can prod them
to reflect on what exactly they're doing, why one approach worked when another
didn't, and what might apply to other situations.  The Ghanaian workshops have
been moving this direction for a few years now.  This coming summer, we'll be
partnering with the African Institute for Mathematical Sciences (AIMS), a
pan-African organization that trains African students to apply mathematics to
local challenges, as well as directly sponsoring African researchers.  We will
be starting from AIMS Ghana students' thesis work (based on projects submitted
by African researchers, that those researchers actually want results for) and
workshopping that code into actual software that can be re-applied in a new
setting.

At Olin, I anticipate working in a similar capacity: my
personal passion is scientific story-telling with mathematical models,
particularly programmatic models.  I think that's probably a good direct fit
into your current offering *SCI 1111: MODELING AND SIMULATION OF THE PHYSICAL
WORLD*, though I'd be enthusiastic about creating an *...OF THE NATURAL WORLD*
option, and critically, linking it to some field work.

What I would most like to contribute to student development is convincing them
that the engineering mindset isn't just about making the "right" gadget: it's
about understanding how many moving parts (some we control, but many that we
cannot) conspire to create results, and how we approach balancing those parts
(be they cogs or hogs) in a way that improves lives.  I'm also quite keen on
engineering problems far-away from the simplifications of Western
infrastructure.

As mentioned in my cover letter, my work is shifting from physical sciences to
natural and social sciences, and I suggest a general working scenario in my
impact statement: basically, study abroad programs for engineering in developing
countries, where we bring the Olin model and work with local talent to solve
real problems.  I have in mind a variety of projects that would involve taking a
modeling approach to ecological systems, combined with clever laboratory and
field surveillance (autonomously deploying mosquito traps!), to achieve useful
forecasting for public health challenges and eventually identify interventions.
I know the modeling part and have a vague outline of the other parts, so I'm
really looking forward to working with other faculty and students crazy enough
to try making this approach viable in places like rural Southeast Asia and
sub-Saharan Africa.
